JS SDK QuickStart Updates (#1078)
near/docs: docs/develop/contracts/js/quickstart.md

---
id: enclave-quickstart
title: NEAR-SDK-JS QuickStart
sidebar_label: Quick Start Guide
---

> Introducing a new way of writing smart contracts by using JavaScript! 🚀

In this quick start guide you'll learn:

- [Setting up a new JavaScript smart contract](#setup)
- [Compile and deploy JS smart contracts](#build)
- [Interacting with JS smart contract](#interact)
- Connecting a simple front-end to the NEAR blockchain

:::tip

> Alternatively, you can [clone the `near-sdk-js-quickstart` repo](https://github.com/near-examples/near-sdk-js-quickstart) for a pre-built template to start from!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can clone the [`near-sdk-js-quickstart`](https://github.com/near-examples/near-sdk-js-quickstart) repository for a pre-built template to start from!
```

:::

---

## Background

NEAR natively supports smart contracts that compile to [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) with two primary languages:

- [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) -> [`near-sdk-rs`](https://docs.near.org/docs/develop/contracts/rust/intro)
- [AssemblyScript](https://www.assemblyscript.org/) -> [`near-sdk-as`](https://docs.near.org/docs/develop/contracts/as/intro)

> In addition to developing natively on NEAR, you can also deploy your [Solidity smart contracts](https://soliditylang.org/) using [Aurora](https://aurora.dev/) (an `EVM`, Ethereum Virtual Machine, contained within a smart contract deployed on NEAR 🤯 ).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to developing natively on NEAR, you can also deploy your [Solidity smart contracts](https://soliditylang.org/) using [Aurora](https://aurora.dev/) (an Ethereum Virtual Machine (`EVM`), contained within a smart contract deployed on NEAR 🤯 ).
```

> Much like Aurora, we have created a JavaScript Enclave or `JSVM` (JavaScript Virtual Machine) that is also contained within a smart contract deployed on NEAR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much like Aurora, we have created a JavaScript Enclave or JavaScript Virtual Machine (`JSVM`) that is also contained within a smart contract deployed on NEAR.
```

> This provides an isolated environment where developers can use a language they are familiar with as well as utilize JavaScript dependencies they are used to. `near-sdk-js` allows you to learn the basics of smart contract development on NEAR without the needing to learn a new programming language. 💪

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This provides an isolated environment where developers can use a language they are familiar with as well as utilize JavaScript dependencies they are used to. `near-sdk-js` allows you to learn the basics of smart contract development on NEAR without needing to learn a new programming language. 💪
```

:::tip Tip
There are several pros and cons when comparing native `Wasm` smart contracts with `JSVM` smart contracts.
:::

| Areas                                      | Native (Wasm) | JSVM        |
| ------------------------------------------ | ------------- | ----------- |
| Synchronous Cross-Contract Calls           | ❌            | ✅          |
| Call methods on any smart contract on NEAR | ✅            | ❌          |
| Standards Support                          | ✅            | Not in v1.0 |
| Function Call Access Key Support           | ✅            | Not in v1.0 |

> In addition to the ability to develop in a language you are already familiar with, the `JSVM` operates in a synchronous environment which provides an easy way to create smart contracts that interact with other contracts know as performing "cross-contract calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the ability to develop in a language you are already familiar with, the `JSVM` operates in a synchronous environment which provides an easy way to create smart contracts that interact with other contracts known as performing "cross-contract" calls.
```

> In addition to the ability to develop in a language you are already familiar with, the `JSVM` operates in a synchronous environment which provides an easy way to create smart contracts that interact with other contracts know as performing "cross-contract calls.

Reviewer 2: I would mention that these are only supported between other contracts in the enclave.

:::warning Heads up
JavaScript smart contract development is not recommended for financial use cases as it is still very new to the NEAR ecosystem.
:::

## Quickstart {#quickstart}
---

In this quick-start guide, you'll learn the basics of setting up a new JavaScript smart contract on the enclave that stores and retrieves a greeting message. You'll then create a simple web-based frontend that displays the greeting and allows you to change it.
## Requirements

### Prerequisites
- [Node.js & npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm)
- [near-cli](https://docs.near.org/docs/tools/near-cli) `v3.1.1` or greater

In order to successfully complete this quickstart guide, you'll need to have a few things installed:
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/about/) and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/):
```bash
curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_17.x | sudo -E bash -  
sudo apt install build-essential nodejs
PATH="$PATH"
```
Ensure that they are both installed by running a version check:
```
node -v
npm -v
npm i -g near-cli
```

> It's important to have the **newest** version of the [NEAR-CLI](https://docs.near.org/docs/tools/near-cli) installed such that you can make use of the JavaScript features. To install or update, run: 

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't remove this because people that already have near-cli won't be able to go through the tutorial.

Reviewer: we could render this paragraph as a "tip", using:
```
:::tip
It's important to....
:::
```

Author: I did put that `v3.1.1` or greater is a requirement in favor of this, but will add an additional warning.

}
```

3. Now install `near-sdk-js` by adding it as a dependency to your project:

```bash

> npm i --save near-sdk-js

Reviewer 2: I would leave it as `npm install` for clarity

}
```

> 5. Create a the file structure for your smart contract:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Create the file structure for your smart contract:
```

```bash
mkdir src && cd src && touch index.js && cd ..
```

:::warning

> Please note that you must have a `index.js` file located in a `src` directory at the root of your project. This allows `near-sdk-js` to find your smart contract and compile it to format that is compatible with the `JSVM`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that you must have the `index.js` file located in a `src` directory at the root of your project. This allows `near-sdk-js` to find your smart contract and compile it to format that is compatible with the `JSVM`.
```

    └── index.js
```

---

### Writing your first contract

> With the basic structure created it's time to start writing your first contract!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the basic structure created, it's time to start writing your first contract!
```

> These steps will create a simple smart contract that will create and retrieve a greeting written on the blockchain. You will create two methods that you can interact with by performing smart contract calls, or simply contract calls. These methods are `set_greeting` and `get_greeting`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These steps will create a simple smart contract that will store and retrieve a greeting written on the blockchain. You will create two methods that you can interact with by performing smart contract calls, or simply contract calls. These methods are `set_greeting` and `get_greeting`.
```

- `set_greeting` stores a value in the form of a string in the smart contract
- `get_greeting` will retrieve the most current value that was written on the contract

1. Start by opening the `src/index.js` file as this is where all of your smart contract logic will be written. Start by importing some dependencies from `near-sdk-js`:

```js
import { NearContract, NearBindgen, call, view } from "near-sdk-js";
```

- `NearContract`: A constructing class for creating smart contracts in the proper format.
- `NearBindgen`: allows your contract to compile to base64 which is compatible with the `JSVM`.
- `call`, `view`: decorators that allow functions in a contract to be discovered and interacted with.

2. Below the SDK imports create a new class that extends the `NearContract`:

```js
@NearBindgen
class StatusMessage extends NearContract {
  // Define the constructor, which initializes the contract with a default message
  constructor() {
    // Used to give access to methods and properties of the parent or sibling class
    super();
    // Default the status records to
    this.message = "Hello Web3 World!";
  }
}
```

> Running the constructor will default the contract's `message` state variable with 'Hello Web3 World!'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running the constructor will default the contract's `message` state variable to 'Hello Web3 World!'.
```

@call
set_greeting(message) {
    env.log(`Saving greeting ${message}`)
    this.message = message
}
```

That's it! Your contract should look like this:

```js
import { NearContract, NearBindgen, call, view } from "near-sdk-js";

@NearBindgen
class StatusMessage extends NearContract {
  // Define the constructor, which initializes the contract with a default message
  constructor() {
    // Used to give access to methods and properties of the parent or sibling class
    super();
    // Default the status records to
    this.message = "Hello Web3 World!";
  }

  // Public method - returns the greeting saved, defaulting to 'Hello Web3 World!'
  @view
  get_greeting() {
    env.log(`current greeting is ${this.message}`);
    return this.message;
  }

  // Public method - accepts a greeting, such as "howdy", and records it on chain
  @call
  set_greeting(message) {
    env.log(`Saving greeting ${message}`);
    this.message = message;
  }
}
```

:::note Heads up
You might see a warning from your JavaScript linter because `near-sdk-js` uses a custom decorator which is an experimental feature. This will be addressed in a future release and can be ignored for now.
:::

---

### Build

> With your smart contract complete, it's time to compile your contract to base64 which is compatible with `JSVM` requires this format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With your smart contract complete, it's time to compile it and encode it to base64. (`JSVM` requires this format)
```

```
near js deploy --accountId <YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID> --base64File build/contract.base64 --deposit 0.1
```

:::

You should see a successful response similar to:

```bash
Starting deployment. Account id: <someAccountID>, node: https://rpc.testnet.near.org, helper: https://helper.testnet.near.org, file: build/contract.base64, JSVM: jsvm.testnet
Transaction Id EvSt3A4auSkBWKUvRo2JtbP7UdwimLmRh7fyn89RZ1d4
To see the transaction in the transaction explorer, please open this url in your browser
https://explorer.testnet.near.org/transactions/EvSt3A4auSkBWKUvRo2JtbP7UdwimLmRh7fyn89RZ1d4
```

Congratulations! You have successfully deployed a JS smart contract into this `JSVM` located inside `JSVM.testnet` contract. :tada:

---

### Interact

Now that your contract is deployed, you can start interacting with it by performing contract calls on the methods you created.

1. For simplicity, export the account ID that the contract is deployed to into an environment variable:

```bash
export JS_CONTRACT="dev-1653584404106-63749024395789"
```

2. Now, initialize the contract which will set the default greeting:

```bash
near js call $JS_CONTRACT init --accountId $JS_CONTRACT --deposit 0.1
```

> If you try to interact with the contract before it's initialized, you'll get an error saying "Contract state is empty".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you try to interact with the contract before it's initialized, you'll get an error saying _"Contract state is empty"_.
```

```bash
Starting deployment. Account id: <someAccountID>, node: https://rpc.testnet.near.org, helper: https://helper.testnet.near.org, file: build/contract.base64, JSVM: jsvm.testnet
Transaction Id EvSt3A4auSkBWKUvRo2JtbP7UdwimLmRh7fyn89RZ1d4
To see the transaction in the transaction explorer, please open this url in your browser
https://explorer.testnet.near.org/transactions/EvSt3A4auSkBWKUvRo2JtbP7UdwimLmRh7fyn89RZ1d4
```

Congratulations! You have successfully deployed a JS smart contract into this `JSVM` located inside `JSVM.testnet` contract. :tada:

---

### Interact

Now that your contract is deployed, you can start interacting with it by performing contract calls on the methods you created.

1. For simplicity, export the account ID that the contract is deployed to into an environment variable:

```bash
export JS_CONTRACT="dev-1653584404106-63749024395789"
```

2. Now, initialize the contract which will set the default greeting:

```bash
near js call $JS_CONTRACT init --accountId $JS_CONTRACT --deposit 0.1
```

If you try to interact with the contract before it's initialized, you'll get an error saying _"Contract state is empty"_.

> 3. Once the contract is initialized, you can view the current greeting by callin the `view` method you wrote earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Once the contract is initialized, you can view the current greeting by calling the `view` method you wrote earlier:
```
